---
permalink: /script/codegraf/003b/
title: CodeGraf - RStudio Cloud quickstart
breadcrumb: OO3b
---

Previous lesson: [Programming environments](../002)

# Quickstart guide for running R in RStudio Cloud

This lesson is for people who want to get started programming R as quickly as possible using the RStudio Cloud platform with no installation required. 

If you want to run RStudio locally on your computer, you can either install it as [part of a larger Anaconda installation](../003) or do a [stand-along installation of R and RStudio](../../r/install/) (recommended). 

**Learning objectives** At the end of this lesson, the learner will:
- 

Total video time: 

## Links

[example script](https://github.com/HeardLibrary/digital-scholarship/blob/master/code/r/use_case_examples.R)

[RStudio Cloud](https://rstudio.cloud/)

# What is RStudio Cloud?

RStudio Cloud is a browser-based cloud installation of RStudio. It does not require any installation or configuration and is free for casual, individual use. Its behavior is nearly identical to a local installation of desktop RStudio, so it is easy to switch at any point. The only downside of RStudio Cloud is that working with files is slightly more complicated than with the desktop version. Files must be uploaded to the server since RStudio Cloud cannot directly access files on your local computer. 

## Getting started with RStudio Cloud

To get started, go to <https://rstudio.cloud/> and click on the `GET STARTED FOR FREE` button (or the `Sign Up` link in the upper right). The subsequent page will show you the limitations of the free plan. The free plan has ample resources for this lesson series, so just sign up for the free plan (you can always upgrade or switch to desktop later). 

After signing up, go to the [login page](http://login.rstudio.cloud) and sign in with the credentials you created. After you log in, you will be taken to the projects page. If you are a new user, you won't see any existing projects -- click on the `New Project` button, then select `New RStudio Project`. 

There will be a significant delay as the system spins up a cloud server to handle your project. (The delay is similar if you restore an existing project.) Once the project has been deployed, you will see a web interface that looks identical to the RStudio desktop interface. 

At this point, you are ready to start on the first lesson on R programming basics (link at the bottom of the page).

When you are done working on your project, you can just click on the `Your Workspace` link in the breadcrumbs at the upper left of the page. The cloud server for your project will remain in place for a while and you can easily return to it by clicking on its link. However, after some period of inactivity, the server will be shut down and will have to be restored. You don't need to "save" the project -- it will remain in the state in which you left it the next time you come back to it.

## Demonstration video (3m31s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/iM6m-l6HgRg" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


----



Next R lesson: [R programming basics](../011)

----
Revised 2022-01-07
