---
permalink: /script/codegraf/020/
title: CodeGraf - Data from files and creating functions
breadcrumb: O20
---

[CodeGraf landing page](../)

# Loading and saving files

If we load data into a script using an `input()` function, those data are *volatile* -- once the script executes, those data are gone.  Unless we like re-entering information over and over, it's good to use other mechanisms that make use of information that persists between computing sessions. A great way to save your work and be able to access it again is to use a file.  In this lesson, we will focus on saving and loading text files (files whose bytes represent text characters).  These are files that you can open, view, edit, and save in a text editor.

**Background required** To successfully complete this lesson, you should be familiar with the following Python concepts and terms:
- *method*
- *argument*
- *newline*
- modules
- list data structures
- iterable objects
- `for` loops
- use of indented code blocks

If you are using Colab notebooks, you should have a Google account and Google Drive.

**Learning objectives** At the end of this lesson, the learner will be able to:
- compa

Total video time:  m  s

## Links

[Lesson Jupyter notebook at GitHub](https://github.com/HeardLibrary/digital-scholarship/blob/master/code/codegraf/020/020.ipynb)

[Lesson Colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1pM_sZW_gAbPNKAuoMRusaMY01vggGWD0)

----

## Unicode

In Python 3, all strings are composed of Unicode characters.  Unicode is a mapping between characters we would like to display and numbers that represent them. Unicode allows us to display characters beyond the Roman alphabet and characters commonly found on a US keyboard.  In earlier lessons, we saw that we could represent a Unicode character by writing the escape sequence `\u` (for Unicode), followed by the [four character hexidecimal number for that character](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unicode_characters).  For example, to write the character for the Euro symbol `€`, use `\u20ac`.  We can insert the sequence for the escaped Unicode character in the middle of a string of ASCII characters. For example:

```
statement = "It costs $25.00, but that's \u20ac21.82 !"
print(statement)
```

## UTF-8 character encoding

*Character encoding* is the way that Unicode numbers are stored in a text file.  The most universally used character encoding for Unicode is called [UTF-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8).  UTF-8 is a clever way to store over a million different characters and symbols using between one and four bytes.  It is also backwardly compatible with one of the early character encoding systems, [ASCII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII), which uses only a single byte to represent a character.  So all files whose characters are encoded in ASCII are also encoded in UTF-8.  UTF-8 has been around since 1993, but there are still some old files and applications that don't use it.  But you should always use UTF-8 as your character encoding whenever possible since it allows text in nearly any language to be represented.

----

# Text editors and code editors (2m13s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/RIzK188oW2A" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

When creating, editing, and saving the text files described in this lesson, you should NOT use a word processor like Microsoft Word. It will create files that include a lot of unwanted information that tracks the format, font, color, etc. of the text. To create, edit, and save plain text files, use one of the text editors described below, or use a code editor if you have one. 

----

## TextEdit text editor for Mac (2m08s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/L_PQ7PMByGk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

To launch the TextEdit program on a Mac, go to the Spotlight Search (magnifying glass in upper right corner of screen) and type `TextEdit`. When the name shows up in the entry box, press the `Enter/Return` key. In the file dialog box that opens, either navigate to the text file you want to open, or click the `New Document` button.

To use TextEdit as a plain text editor (no nasty hidden characters), go to the `TextEdit` menu at the upper left of your screen and select `Preferences`. On the `New Document` tab, select the `Plain text` radio button. Under options, uncheck everything. In the `Open and Save` tab, under `Plain Text File Encoding`, drop down `Unicode (UTF-8)` for both opening and saving files.

----

## Notepad text editor for Windows (0m58s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/CFfyRemw394" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

To launch the Notepad program on a Windows computer, go to the search box (next to the `Start` button on the lower left) and start typing `Notepad`. When the name shows up in the list, press `Enter/Return`. 

Notepad should default to being a plain text editor. If you have problems with character encoding, when you open a file, pay attention to the `Encoding` dropdown. It should work properly if set to `Auto-Detect`, but if not, you can manually set it to `UTF-8`. Similarly, when using the `Save As` dialog, make sure that the `Encoding` dropdown is set on `UTF-8`.

## Code editors (optional; Windows or Mac, 2m13s)

To do the exercises in this lesson, you don't need to install a code editor. However, if you have one already, it's fine to use it. For example, if you installed the Anaconda distribution to get Jupyter Notebooks, you can install and run Visual Studio Code (VS Code) from the navigator screen. If you want to know more about code editors, you can watch the following video, although it is not necessary to do the lesson.  

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/waJUTY9Jl98" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

**Installing the editors**

To install Visual Studio Code, go to <https://code.visualstudio.com/>.  You browser should detect your operating systme and suggest the correct download for it.

To install Atom, go to <https://atom.io/>.  You browser should detect your operating systme and suggest the correct download for it.

----

# Moving text into and out of files

The following examples read or write a single string to a file.  **Note:** If you do not know how to control what application is used to open files with various extensions (e.g. `.txt`), if the wrong applications is opening a certain kind of file, or if you don't know how to make file extensions visibls on your computer, see [this page for Windows](https://heardlibrary.github.io/digital-scholarship/computer/files-windows/) or [this page for Mac](https://heardlibrary.github.io/digital-scholarship/computer/files-mac/).

## Writing text (4m12s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/4d_vtoLSoaM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This code will write the contents of the string variable `some_text` to a file:

```
file_object = open('datafile.txt', 'wt', encoding='utf-8')
file_object.write(some_text)
file_object.close()
```

Notes:
- The arguments of the `open()` function are strings and can be replaced with variables rather than literals if you want.
- In the second argument, `'wt'`, the "w" stands for "write" and the "t" stands for "text".
- The last argument specifies the character encoding.  You can usually get away with omitting this argument, since the default encoding in Python 3 is UTF-8, but the situation is more clear if you include it and occasionally things break if you don't specify UTF-8 when reading and writing.
- The file write isn't necessarily completed untill you close the file with the `close()` function. 
- Because the file name in the first argument doesn't specify any path, it will default to the directory from which the script is being run.

A shorter way to accomplish the same thing is:

```
with open('datafile.txt', 'wt', encoding='utf-8') as file_object:
    file_object.write(some_text)
```

When the indented code block finishes executing, the `.close()` method is automatically executed.

----

## Reading text (3m29s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0dOZAYedS6c" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This code will read the entire contents of a file as a single string and assign it to the variable `read_text`.

```
file_object = open('datafile.txt', 'rt', encoding='utf-8')
read_text = file_object.read()
file_object.close()
```

Notes:
- As with opening a file to write, opening a file to read defaults in Python 3 to UTF-8, so including the encoding parameter is optional. But it's safest and clearer to include it.
- In the second argument, "rt", the "r" stands for "read" and the "t" stands for "text".
- The `.read()` method doesn't take any arguments.

A shorter way to accomplish the same thing is:

```
with open('datafile.txt', 'rt', encoding='utf-8') as file_object:
    read_text = file_object.read()
```

As in the case of writing to a file, the `.close()` method is automatically performed when the indented code block is finished.

----

# Determining file locations for your file system

If you are confused about navigating around in the file directories of your computer, or if you are unfamiliar with file paths, for more information see [this page for Windows](https://heardlibrary.github.io/digital-scholarship/computer/directories-windows/) or [this page for Mac](https://heardlibrary.github.io/digital-scholarship/computer/directories-mac/).

Of the next four videos, you should watch only the one(s) that are appropriate for the environment in with you are running Jupyter notebooks.  The examples illustrate using loading a Pandas DataFrame, but the process for accessing the files is the same for loading a data file into any Python data structure.

## Mounting a Google Drive in Google Colab (5m08s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hfOAyJw8Xfw" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## Variation in the behavior of mounting Google Drive in Colab (3m05s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zYHVzPV3djs" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


----

## Locating a data file when running a local Jupyter notebook under Mac OS (4m54s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pedaEJGIYI8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


----

## Locating a data file when running a local Jupyter notebook under Windows OS (5m54s)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

----

# Accessing files from your file system

## Local file system (Mac and Windows)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The `.getcwd()` function from the `os` module returns the current working directory. This is the directory to and from which files will be saved if only a filename is given without any path. Typically the current working directory is the directory from which the Python script was executed. 

This function is useful when you want to allow Python to save files in a some location that is relative to the script (for example, in the same directory as the script, or in a directory that is a subdirectory of the directory containing the script).

```
import os
working_directory = os.getcwd()
print(working_directory)
```

The `.home()` method of the `Path` object in the `pathlib` module creates another path object representing the user's home directory. The `str()` function can be used to generate a string representation of the home directory path. This function is extremely valuable because it is NOT operating system-specific. Thus you can write code to run on either Mac or Windows and instruct users to place files in either their home folder or some subfolder of their home folder.

This method is useful when you want to designate that a file is at some particular location relative to the user's home directory regardless of where the Python script is located. Since special folders like `Documents` and `Downloads` are generally subdirectories of the home folder, that means the user can store the files in familiar places (like `Documents`) or in a convenient location such as the place where a file might have been dowloaded using a browser.

```
from pathlib import Path

# Configuration section of code
home = str(Path.home())
print(home)
# This variable can be prepended to the names of files downloaded using a browser
downloads_folder = home + '/Downloads/'

# Script section of code
filename = 'consoleText.txt'
print(downloads_folder + filename)
```

----

## Cloud drive system (Colab)

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Since a Colab notebook is operating in the cloud and not on your local computer, you cannot directly access files that your notebook interacts with. However, if you map your Google Drive as demonstrated in the lesson videos, you can upload and download data files to your Google Drive and access them in your script. 

If you have intalled the Google Drive application on your computer, you can drop or open files directly on your Google Drive folder on your local computer since that folder is automatically synched with your Google Drive in the cloud.

Typically, when your Google Drive is mapped, its path will be `/content/drive/My Drive/`. So if that path is prepended to a file path relative to the root of your Google Drive, you can access any file in your Google drive using that full path.

```
google_drive_root = '/content/drive/My Drive/'

# My data are in a directory of my Google Drive called "data".
working_directory = google_drive_root + 'data/'

file_path = working_directory + 'test.txt'
with open(file_path, 'rt', encoding='utf-8') as file_object:
    read_text = file_object.read()
print(read_text)
```

----

# Reading and writing lists

## Newlines and writing using print()

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In previous lessons, we learned about a special character called *newline*. A newline character is not a visible character - rather, it causes an action: moving to the next line on the screen when displaying text. 
In word processing, the newline character is sometimes called a *hard return*. In Python, a newline character is generated by the sequence `\n`. The backslash indicates that the following character(s) should not be printed, but rather be interpreted as some other character. 

Newline characters play a special role in files. They are used to indicate structure in the file and some Python commands are designed to detect newline characters and automatically translate the data in the file into Python data structures. 

Notice that `.write()` is a method, so it's added to the end of the names of file objects, while `print()` is a function and the file object is passed into it as an argument.  Also note that if you want to have newlines separating lines that you've output to a file with the `.write()` method, you can just add it to the end of the output string, like this:

```python
fileObject.write(firstLine + '\n')
```


----

## Reading lines of text into list structures by iteration

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

----

## .readlines() and .splitlines()

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

----

# Accessing files via the Internet

<iframe width="1120" height="630" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MWONQtQHPzk" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

----


# Practice exercises

1. Yale University has an awesome w

----

Next lesson: [list of dictionary tables](../021)

----

Revised 2020-10-07
