---
permalink: /script/codegraf/038/
title: CodeGraf - Sensors with CircuitPython - Background
breadcrumb: O38
---

[First beginner Python lesson](../004)

# Sensors with CircuitPython: Background

**Learning objectives** At the end of this lesson, the learner will be able to:
- describe how CircuitPython is different from normal CPython.
- describe the Blinka distribution and state what kinds of devices can use it.
- describe a module.
- import a module into a script.
- explain the syntax of a statement that instantiates a custom object.
- use a `while True:` loop to keep a Python script running indefinitely.
- use `try...except...` clauses to prevent a Python script from terminating when an error is thrown.
- list two ways that using I2C with Stemma QT connectors differs from other ways of communicating with devices.
- state how Boolean True and False states are related to voltages in a logic circuit.
- draw a sketch showing how a switch and pull-up resistor can be used to change the voltage of an input pin from high to low. 
- explain why the QT Py RP2040 cannot write data to its memory under normal operation.
- state what is special about the `boot.py` file in CircuitPython.
- list three ways execution of the `code.py` file can be initiated in CircuitPython.

*Note: some of these objectives may need to be moved to later lessons.*

Total video time: n/a

# Links

[Lesson Jupyter notebook at GitHub]()

[Lesson Colab notebook]()


----

Under construction

# What


Next lession: [Programming the board](../039)

----
Revised 2022-02-09
